% mainfile: ../Mag_Iono_2014.tex
% \textbf{}
% Ch10: ITM Convection
% lec [13.0,13.5]


Earth's Magnetosphere: Role of the Ionosphere and

Topics:
(1) Field-aligned currents (aka, Birkeland currents)
(2) Role of the ionosphere in convection (aka ITM coupling)

(1) Field-aligned Currents
In the literature, you will see the phrases "Birkeland currents" and
"field-aligned currents" (FACs) used interchangeably. It appears that
magnetospheric-oriented papers are tending towards using "field-aligned
currents" much more often these days, although you will find many older
papers that exclusively talk in terms of Birkeland currents. They're the
same thing. Don't let it blow your head up!

If you refer to figure 1, we are talking about the region of currents
extending from the low-altitude polar regions, along the magnetic field
geometry, and into the tailward region. We've previously discusses other
currents within the magnetospheric system, such as the magnetopause
currents, which form somewhat of a barrier between the Earth's
magnetosphere and the solar wind. These currents are surface currents
(see figure 2).

We've also discussed the neutral sheet current (ChX, SectXX) -- a
dawn-to-dusk 
current within the plasma sheet in the magnetotail; it is in response to the "stretching" of the Earth's magnetic
field geometry in the tailward direction due to the solar wind. And then
there was the ring current (ChX,SecXX), a current induced my the field
gradient and curvature drifts.  

The one important current system we have not yet talked about is the FAC
system. This is becuase the FAC system is probably one of the more
complex current systems --- because, really, to understand the Birkeland
currents (yea, I just changed up the nomenclature), one needs to not
only understand the dynamics of the magnetosphere, but must also
investigate the processes and dynamics governing the ionosphere. We will
discuss ionospheric dynamics more rigorously in CH-XXX; we will also
discuss the mesosphere and, in turn, wrap these things together and talk
about the mesosphere-lower-thermosphere [MLT] system.

FACs were saved for last, also, because one could argue that they are
hot research topics in terms of magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling.
Surprisingly, still there is fairly little that is fully understood
about these currents.

The UCAR COMET program has some nice pictures of these current systems
(figure 2). I urge you to go their website and view some of the movies.
Figure 2 is an important image: it really gives us an idea about how
these current systems interact, and more importantly it gives us a good
feel how and where the various currents close. In Figure 2, one can see
how the FACs tie into the bigger picture -- how they connect the Earth's
polar ionosphere to both the ring current and the magnetopause current
system. This picture truly has important implications: for example, to study the
outermost regions of the magnetosphere---all the way at the magnetopause
itself, interfaced with the magnetosheath and, ultimately, the solar
wind---one must also have at least a vague conception of ionospheric
physics. In fact, you really begin to sense the deep connections going
on here: the ionosphere is not some independent system, to be studied in
and of itself, and neither is the magnetosphere; furthermore, the solar
wind's effect on the magnetopause tells us that, via the FACs, the solar
wind and the ionosphere must all be in touch with each other, feeding
and begin fed by each other. This is a truly grand and unified system.
Learn as much as you can about any and all of it; too often researchers
will hunker down and focus on one tiny aspect of one sub-system of a
sub-system of either the ionosphere or magnetosphere. 

From the figure, it should be clear that there are two main FAC current
systems: one closing at the magnetopause current system, the other in
the ring current. These FAC systems are known as the region 1 and region
2 birkeland current systems. That is, the equatorward FACs reaching down into the
polar ionosphere are Region 2 FACs, while the poleward FACs are the
Region 1 currents.

At this point in time, it's kind of weird: you hear people referring to
the ring current without ever mention the ionosphere's role in the ring
current population and its dynamics. Possibly because of the division of
geospace labor that is manifested in the separation of the GEM and CEDAR
communities, systems like these can be studied quite rigorously in vain
because the focus isn't broad enough. Just like a magnetospheric
scientist within the GEM community might study the ring current in
detail without much heed for the ionosphere, folks in the CEDAR
community can be found discussing the ionosphere with just as much gusto
and with just as little reference to the ring current.

Ok, ok -- so we've talked up these FACs quite a bit, but what are they?
Most pictures you find in introductory textbooks on magnetospheric
current systems show you a great deal about FACs without really telling
you what is going on (see Figure3). While such a categorical approach is
not sufficient for fully understanding this current system, it does have
enough merit to briefly discuss. (Why are these images not sufficient?
Think about a perfect TV family on a 1950s sitcom: sure, you can learn
some of the basic ideas about what an American family is---there's a
brother, mother, children, etc---but seriously: it's not real life.)

You see in figure 3 quite clearly that the Region 1 Birkeland currents
are the poleward-most FACs touching down in the ionosphere. They
typically enter the polar ionosphere on the dawnside, cross the polar
cap region, and leave the ionosphere on the duskside. These currents
link back to typically tailward regions...

The more equatorward FACs are the Region 2 currents. You will notice
they have the opposite orientation from the Region 1 currents: they
touch down on the duskward polar ionosphere, and leave the ionosphere on
the dawnside. These currents seem to have a more complex structures.
They come in around your mid-latitudes, ultimately stemming from the
ring current -- these don't extend far back into the tail like the
Region 1 system.

In the polar cap region, where in our cartoon picture of the FACs we see
a horizontal current connecting the FACs at the dawn and dusk side
ionosphere, we have what are called the Pedersen currents. Pedersen
currents are defined as currents that flow parallel to the electric
field and perpendicular to the magnetic field. A possible mnemonic for
this remeber that PEdersen currents are "Parallel Electric" currents
(works for me!). You'll also notice horizontal currents in closed loops
about the touchdown point of the FACs: these are known as Hall currents
--- that is, currents that flow perpendicular to both the electric and
magnetic field (my mnemonic: a capital "H" shows a perpendicular
intersection, and it's conveniently followed by the word "all" giving
us: Hall currents are "perpendicular all" currents).


You'll also notice that via the Pedersen and Hall currents, the Region 1
and Region 2 FAC systems interact: the ring current is intimately
connected with the ionosphere, with the magnetopause, with the
magnetotail (these connections cannot be emphasized enough). 

But enough with the cartoons: what cause all of this? What physically
allows this system to persist? 

One important component is the variability in the ionospheric
conductivity. We will talk about this this later, in ChX-SecXX, when we
talk about the ionosphere in more detail.

For now, let's discuss the Pedersen currents. What causes them? It comes
down to ionospheric-thermospheric winds: you needs these winds to
generate the current; if you don't have the winds, you don't have the
current; if you don't have the current, you do not have the full closure
on the ring current or mangetopause current systems. And that's kind of
a big deal! (You cannot just be a "GEM student" and study the ring
current, or magnetopause currents, or tail currents, without
understanding, at least a little, about what ionospheric/thermospheric
winds are and, more importantly, the variability of those winds. This is
a hot topic in ITM science right now.)

Let's do a quick Ionosphere/Thermosphere 101: to first order --- that
first term in our Taylor series expansion that describes thermospheric
winds --- you have the story line given in figure 4. On the left hand
sun, you'll notice the Sun, or at least a weird arrow representation of
it. Energy from the Sun heats up the dayside of the Earth, heating up
the air on the dayside, and causing winds that blow from the dayside in
the nightward direction. See? To first order, the winds in the
thermosphere are really, really simple. You've got energy deposition on
the dayside, which induces a high-pressure cell, and gases flow from
regions of high pressure to low pressure --- i.e., the heated, higher
pressure dayside air flows towards the cooler, lower pressure nightside.
This in turn sets up some air circulation, which is represented in
figure 4 by the orange curves over the polar region. You can see that
the circulation is from the dayside to the nightside in the
polarward-most region, and that this displacement of air on the dayside,
combined with the addition of air on the nightside, sets up some motion
at the equatorward flanks of these curves... And so, ultimately, to
first order, you have this simple 2-cell pattern. We call these the
thermospheric winds, but you could just as well call them tides, and our
approximation could be called the first "fundamental" mode of the
diurnal tide. This is the type of terminology that is used much lower in
altitude, down in say the troposphere.

So you have the neutral air flow, and it's dragging over the polar caps
within the same region where we have these ion populations. The neutral
air is flowing from the dayside to the nightside, bumping into the ions
(helium, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, electrons)
along the way, and slowly pushing them in the general direction of the
neutral flow. But a charged particle moving over the pole behaves very
differently than a neutral particles moving over the pole: just think
in terms of vxB (remember the right-hand rule?). Thinking simply in
terms of vxB, you can see that you will collect positive charge on the
dawnside and negative charge on the duskside. This creates an electric
field that goes from the dawnside to the duskside, and this electric
field actually maps all the way out into the magnetotail and helps
support what's known as the cross-tail electric field (which extends all
the way back to the nightside reconnection points in the deep tail
region). This electric field is called a polarization elelectric field.
This polarization electric field induces new currents which act to
redistribute the charge, and thus we've set up the Pedersen current
("Parallel Electric" currents) that is required for the Region 1
Birkeland current system.

Figure 5b shows polarization electric fields in white (that is, the
Pedersen currents) and the induced Hall currents in yellow. The Hall
current is induced by a variable, non-constant conductivity and
collision frequency over the
polar cap, and how these quantities continue to vary in time. Beware:
when discussing these FAC systems and thermospheric winds, be sure you
know what each component of the image you are viewing represents, or
things can get confusing very quickly. Notice how similar figure 5a and
figure 5b are, and yet note that they are illustrating different
phenomena. The primary difference you'll notice is that the 2-cell
pattern is reversed: while in figure 5a we are looking at the 2-cell
convection of neutral winds, in 5b we are viewing the 2-cell pattern
representing the Hall currents. The Hall currents run opposite the
neutral winds; the neutral winds over the polarward-most region blow
from the dayside to the nightside, while the Hall currents in this
region flow in the opposite direction, dayward from the nightside.

If a picture is unclear to you, start from first principles: what causes
what? This is generally a good way to approach any dynamo system, as we
will see again when we discuss the equatorial ionosphere (ChX-SectXX).
Put the dynamo together step by step: Sun, heat, high pressure, air flow
from high pressure to low pressure, a collision-induced charge particle
drift in the same direction, an induced current via the magnetic Lorentz
force (qvxB), polarization electric field, induced Pedersent currents,
and ultimately the Hall currents. Phew!

<Question about coriolis forces... Digression on when and where coriolis
forces are important.... Might be better put in another section... 40
percent into the video>

Ring Current Closure
Figure 6 shows a partial ring current system, which is connected to the
Birkeland currents, whereas lower in altitude in the equatorial plane
(i.e., lower in L shell), one find the proper ring current, fully
wrapping around the Earth, closed within the inner magnetosphere. Why do
the partial currents stop part way around the Earth, then instead trace
out the magnetic field and head to the polar ionosphere? The reason is,
as we go further out in L-shell from the ring current, charged particles
will actually experience a potential drop that is lower along the
magnetic field geometry, and closing in the polar ionosphere, then it
does along the equator, as the ring current does. As you go even further
out in L, that same potential drop is no longer compelling enough to
attract the charged particles, and the partial ring currents eventually
disappear completely leaving only the cross-tail current, extending from
the dawnside magnetopause to the duskside magnetopause. The transition
on the nightside, from the ring current, outward in L past the partial
ring currents, to the region of the cross-tail current is not a clear
transition. We have methods and principles to help us understand from
ideal MHD, or more generally from non-ideal MHD, but still: understand
that it is not clear cut. Certainly the transition from a partial ring
current, inward in L, to the full ring current is currently an
interesting and actively researched problem. Note that the FACs
(Birkeland currents) in figure 6 are Region 2 field-aligned
currents (remember: Region 2 FACs are associated with the ring current,
while Region 1's are connected to the magnetopause);
Region 1 FACs extend even deeper into the tail.

In figure 6b, we've drawn an example of a Region 1 FAC in red. We see
there is a cross-tail current, extending from the dawnside magnetopause
to the duskside magnetopause, and that the magnetopause region where the
the cross-tail current is meeting the magnetopause current system, there
exists a potential drop largest along the magnetic field vectors,
heading towards the polar ionosphere. (Note that this figure actually
makes it look like the ring current on the dayside is very close to the
dayside magnetopause..... That's just a bad picture, really.)

So that's our FAC system, one of the four dominant current systems
(magnetopause, cross-tail, ring, FAC) in the magnetosphere. It should be
re-emphasized that calling these "individual" current systems "systems",
one is making ambiguous the fact that all the current systems are
connected and rely on one another for current closure --- that is,
they're all apart of the same circuit. 

Ionosphere-Thermosphere-Magnetosphere Coupling
If we're going to talk about the ionosphere, it is at one's own peril to
not mention the magnetosphere, and likewise for the magnetosphere: the
ionosphere is one of the magnetosphere's two boundaries -- the other
boundary being the solar wind at the magnetosheath/magnetopause. It's
one big, complex system --- and can be looked at from a systems theory
approach. Those of you associated with CEDAR know
that there is a real push to study all of these components --- the solar
wind, the magnetosphere, the ionosphere --- from a systems theory
approach. For those of you who are engineers, you know that a systems
theory approach to studying complex systems is a staple of an engineer's
undergraduate curriculum: system stability, instability, bifurcations,
etc. 

The Quasi-Math of ITM Coupling: the Steady State Approach
Fully knowing that it not true, and not even a good approximation, we
can ask about what this coupling is like in a fictional magnetosphere
that is in the steady state --- that is, where the magnetic field is not
varying in time and correspondingly there is only an electrostatic
electric field (Faraday's differential law of induction):
\begin{math}
  \frac{\partial \vec{B}}{\partial t} = - \bigtriangledown \times
  \vec{E} = 0
\end{math}

I must repeat: this is not true for the actual magnetosphere-ionosphere
interaction, and it is not even a good approximation. This is a
first-order approach and is only good for a fictional magnetosphere. Our
magnetosphere is most often not in a steady state: the assumption of a
magnetosphere that does not vary in time is violated all of the time!
It's kind of wierd: oftentimes, an overly simplistic approach like this
will be invoked to help explain some phenomenon, e.g., dayside
reconnection, that is inherently in violation of the steady-state
assumption. Beware of this kind of thing; question how useful the
analysis is, how instructive it is to invoke a highly fictionalized
magnetosphere to explain the much more complex, much more dynamic
magnetosphere that actually exists. We will discuss such a fictionalized
magnetosphere, but do not go forth placing much stock in it or using
these equations to do research with!

So, assuming the magnetic field doesn't vary in time, by Faraday's law,
we know that the electric field has no curl and, so, the electric field
can be generated by a scalar potential:
\begin{math}
  \vec{E} = -\bigtriangledown \phi
\end{math}


We also can invoke the condition that the electric field is everwhere
perpendicular to the magnetic field, at least in the region of interest.
(This is true, for example, if we assume plane waves.)

One result of no magnetic field time derivative is that the magnetic
flux threading some area, A, is constant:
\begin{math}
  \int_{A}{\vec{B}\bullet d\vec{s}} = const
\end{math}

If you have an idea of the scale length you're interested (for example,
in the ionosphere, we might be interested in scale length $L_{io}^{2}$
and in the magnetosphere, we might be interested in sizes on the order
of $L_{msp}^{2}$), then the constant flux through a surface can be used
to show:

\begin{math}
  B_{io}L_{io}^{2} = B_{msp}L_{msp}^{2}
\end{math}

This can be rewritten as:
\begin{math}
  \frac{L_{io}}{L_{msp}} = \sqrt{ \frac{B_{msp}}{B_{io}} }
\end{math}

These are back-of-the-envelope calculations. In the same manner, we can
also set up back-of-the-envelope equations for the electric fields in
the (fictionalized) ionosphere and the (fictionalized) magnetosphere,
and for the typical charged particle velocities. 

\begin{gather*}
  \frac{E_{io}}{E_{msp}} = \frac{ \bigtriangleup \phi / L_{io} }{
  \bigtriangleup \phi / L_{msp} } = \sqrt{ \frac{B_{io}}{B_{msp}} }\\
  \frac{v_{io}}{v_{msp}} = \frac{ E_{io}/B_{io} }{ E_{msp}/B_{msp} } =
  \frac{B_{msp}}{B_io} 
\end{gather*}


